This is July 29, 1987. We're in the dean's
conference room at Texas A&M. I'm interviewing
Chewie Hinojosa.
OK. I first got involved with Texas A&M University
back in 1954 when I came here as a student. I was in
general studies at the time and trying to find a
career or curriculum that would interest me.
During the career day of that year, I was able to
look around the university and saw that the work in
the Department of Architecture interested me and
felt that I could do it and enjoy it. Where were you
living at that time? Originally, I came from south
Texas in the little town of Ed Couch in the lower Rio
Grande Valley. It's about 20 miles from the
Mexican border and about 50 miles inland from the
Texas Gulf Coast. You were up here for a career day.
Actually, I was already enrolled at A&M as a
student at the time, yeah. How did that happen? Why
did you choose A&M? Oh, A&M, yes. Well, my father
talked to a friend of his he knew who had a feet store
there in Edcouch, and he was an A&M graduate. And so
he asked him if he would suggest any university
that I might go to after I graduated from high
school, after getting ready to graduate from high
school. So he, you know, Nagy, he recommended
Texas A&M. He thought it was a good school. And so
that was how I happened to select A&M, you know. And
then you came up for career day. No. And I just
applied. to the university at the time. It was a
college, Texas A&M College. Sight unseen. Yes,
sight unseen, just based on catalogs and whatever
I could get in the mail from them after I decided to
inquire about the university and decided to come
to A&M. And so they accepted my enrollment based on
the normal procedures for enrolling. It wasn't
until I was here for about a year, almost a year,
that I didn't know what to enroll in, basically. I
just enrolled in a general engineering
curriculum. And after about three quarters of the
year, I wasn't really doing well. And I actually
was in the Corps for one year. And it was a miserable
experience, because we really couldn't study.
Yeah. Was it mandated to be in the Corps at that
time? Actually, interestingly enough, at the
time, A new president had been hired by him who was
not an Aggie. I believe his name was Morgan,
President Morgan, if I remember correctly. And
he, being, I believe, from the East, had requested
and had gotten approval to make the Corps optional
at the time. But when I enrolled, since all the
literature was kind of geared to the Corps, and I
was a member of the Texas National Guard at the
time, I think it will be something like that. I did
enjoy some discipline and kind of the rigors of the
military and order and all that. That appealed to
me. But when we landed here in the first weekend
after we had been here for about a week in
orientation, We lost about 15 or 20 freshmen that
first weekend because of the crazy, I mean, this is
like, they were going out to West Point, that's
what they were trying to do. Interestingly
enough, also, I guess part of the psychology was
that the upperclassmen could not touch us
physically because it had also been mandated that
you could not touch a student physically,
physically haze them because they had had some
problems in the past.
And they had some after that, too. Yes. They had
some brothers afterwards, too. And so they had
given strict orders they would not touch a student
physically. So they launched a psychological
warfare, which is probably worse. Yeah. Because
they really, it was a reign of terror on us all the
time, constantly, constantly. And if I remember
correctly, the numbers out of, I think our outfit
had 120 freshmen. And there were about 60 of us left
by the middle of the school year. And all of us were
just barely hanging in there grade-wise and so
forth. And then about the end of the year, about 30
of us was left in the outfit. And so I said, well,
this is not really what I'm looking for. I mean, I
came to study. I didn't feel I needed all this
exorbitant discipline. But we couldn't study. We
couldn't eat. I went home. They thought I was some
kind of a refugee. I lost weight. I wasn't that
heavy to begin with. My hair was cut short. I looked
like I had come out of Huntsville. So
I said, well, I don't need this. And since the Corps
was optional, I went ahead and finished out the
year. I felt, OK, I'll finish out my commitment for
that year that I had agreed to do. And the next year,
I went civilian still. And also, because I had used
the career days and opportunity to look around,
and I believe in career days for that reason,
because it did help me to kind of see the
opportunities that were available to me as a
student here. I did go around all the different
departments that they And when I got to the fourth
floor of the academic building where the
architecture school used to be, I immediately
sensed that I could relate to the work and to the
environment and everything else. So I made my
decision quickly, and I said, okay, that's what
I'm going to do. I'm going to change curriculums
coming at the end of the school year and when I
enroll for the next year. Who was the dean? Yeah, I
guess an interesting anecdote. I was counsel. I
had to go through counseling because I was just
barely scraping by with a C average. And the
counselor, after they did all the testing and
everything else, told me that I had no aptitude for
architecture and anything related to the field.
But interesting enough, the following year, I was
a distinguished student. My grade points shot up
very high. And I managed to get on the dean's list as
a distinguished student. And from there on, it was
fine. I enjoyed the program and everything else. I
really felt that I was doing what I wanted to do. And
then during that year, we had various people
visiting lectures that came to the university. It
was a good lecture program. We had a good lecture
series. And I met different people from around
this country. And I got to know other faculty in the
advanced years. I got to know Joe McGraw, who was
then a design professor, and Professor Edward
Romanek, who was also the director of the design
studios. And they sort of were, they took me under
their wing so that they could help me along and gave
me encouragement. And then I got to meet, well, I
visualized myself finishing architecture and
going to, you know, work actually, work for a firm
and going to architectural practice and
hopefully eventually get my license and all that
business. But during the last year or so, I then got
interested, of course, in teaching and they
Professor Ramegan-McGraw encouraged me if I
would be interested in teaching. They needed some
faculty, so I taught for three years. And during
that time, they had some guest speakers. And one of
them was Reginald Isaacs from Harvard. And he had
been in South America and was on his way back to
Harvard when they had asked him if he would lecture
here. So he came and lectured at A&M at the time. And
so we visited and we talked. And so he indicated
that he would be interested in my applying at
Harvard. in planning. And so I did that later, and I
was accepted. And so after working for one summer
at Caudill Rowland Scott, and actually worked
with Bill Caudill that particular summer, it was
an interesting experience in itself. Great guy. I
really enjoyed working with him, and he was really
an inspiration. I then came back and taught for two
years at A&M, and then applied at Harvard, and got
accepted, and went for two years in the graduate
planning program. I got my master's in city
planning there. What year? That was in 62, went
from 62 to 1964. I taught from 60 to 62, I'm sorry,
here in architecture. Then I worked in Houston the
summer of 1960, and I worked in Harold Hamilton's
office in Dallas in the summer of 63. So then in, I'm
sorry, in 1961. Then in 1962, and then I went to
Harvard until 64. And there I got a job. I'm sorry,
well, after I finish, rather, I interviewed some
people from California and had gotten a job,
actually a job offer. I interviewed with a firm
representative from a firm in San Francisco,
Warneke, John Carl Warneke's firm. He had been out
to the East Coast and was interviewing at
different schools. And so I was introduced to him.
That's interesting, because I was working in his
office. Really? Yeah. Well, they were setting up a
planning department, actually, within the
architecture firm at the time, and they needed
somebody to help them set it up. They left their
libraries and their expertise in planning. So I
did, and we got off well, and so I got everything
packed, and I took off, went home to see my parents,
and then I drove in a little Ford Falcon all the way
to California in the middle of the hottest summer I
can imagine. When we hit Southern California, it
was 110 or 120 degrees, something like that.
Anyway, I survived the trip and got to California.
But when I got to San Francisco, this gentleman I
had interviewed with told me, I have a very
interesting job assignment for you. And so I said,
let's talk about it. So I did. I had got myself
checked in. And he wanted to send me to Hawaii. And I
said, well, I don't know. I said, I was interested
in coming out to California, because I've heard so
much about California. I wanted to really get to
know California, San Francisco area, the whole
stadium. So I wasn't too keen on that. So I managed
to contact, I was kind of in the process of making an
arrangement to ship my car and everything to
Hawaii. And I just, by luck, happened to call a
former professor of mine, Professor Joseph J.
McGraw, who at the time had also, before that even
had gone to California, was working in
California. And I sort of kept some
correspondence with him, and I just thought I'd
say hello and see how he was doing. And so he said,
well, what are you doing out here on the West Coast?
I said, I didn't realize you were interested in
coming out to the West Coast. He said, well, I
wasn't either. I just sort of thought I would. And
so he started telling me what he was doing, who he
was working with in this fairly large firm in the
Bay Area, and that there were native people, and
that if I was interested in working for their firm,
I could have a job, you know. And so he offered me a
position in their firm. And he explained the kind
of work that the firm did. It was an architecture,
engineering, and planning firm. And so I said,
well, I don't know. I have to check with these
people first because I already made my
commitments to them. So once I could not change
them, he gave me an assignment in San Francisco
office, in Wernicke's office. I decided then to go
with, at the time, it was Woolsey, Hamm, and Blair,
fairly large firm in California. And I started
working on a Sunday afternoon. They were so busy at
the time. California was an incredibly busy state
at the time. That was 1962? This was in 1964. Right.
At Foster City. In 1964, the firm had built the
first building in the new town called Foster City,
which was sort of an invention building into the
Bay Area. It had been approved, of course, and so
forth. By Jack Foster from Texas. Yes. Yes, I
didn't realize his origin. That's where we met.
That's right. We were working with William Blair,
and it was an interesting operation because we
had, I think, a very unique setup of planners,
engineers, architects working together in
interdisciplinary teams, which I have believed
in. See, Joe McGraw was there, and Jim Gardner. Did
he arrive later? I'm not quite sure. Jim, I think,
arrived later, yeah. And Matt Copenhaver. Matt
Copenhaver was there. Dick Ehrenberger was
there. Let's see who else did we play. Well, that's
enough talent for one firm. It was a very
interesting group, actually. And the
development design department, which we called
3D department, was an interesting department
because we brought all these people together into
a team. And we did the preliminary work and the
selling of the studies to clients. And then the
preliminary concepts were hammered out by this
group. And then they were passed on to the other
individuals for the surveying and the actual
engineering and cost estimates and so forth. So it
made for an interesting combination. After
having been with the firm for actually, I guess it
was less than a year, they decided to encourage me
to continue with the firm by giving me a bonus at the
end of the year, which they seldom gave to anybody
who was with the firm less than a year. And the guys
said they were in a real quandary about it. So I felt
good about that. I felt I wanted to continue with
this firm. And they, in fact, gave me more
responsibilities and larger assignments. I got
to work on the Southside's plan with it for the big
developer, Dolger, Mr. Dolger, who had done
basically built all of that stuff. South San
Francisco. South San Francisco area after the
war, which made the Tiki-Taki house famous. He's
the guy who actually built them. You had a hand in
that. No, I did not have a hand in the Tiki-Takis. I
did have an interesting experience meeting the
man, because he was a very interesting fellow,
actually. He was a very down-to-earth guy, and he
felt that he was meeting and addressing a need that
wasn't being met by anybody else for low- and
middle-income families, especially after the
war when there was an with a high shortage of
housing. And one of his policies, an interesting
one that he had at the time he was building houses in
South San Francisco area was that he would put a
tree in front of every house as a minimum in the
landscaping and so forth. So we went back and drove
around this area. And it really looked kind of
decent, even though it was kind of high density.
Houses were packed in kind of tight, to be sure. But
he had kept up a fairly attractive quality
development after all. In the new area that we were
working in, the 25,000 acre that we were working
with him now, that was definitely a quality
development, and he wanted that, and he wanted to
set a good standard, and it was a beautiful area of
the county. How long were you with Woolsey
Hammond, Blair? Well, I was there in the area about
a year and a half, and then at the end of 1965, they
had gotten some assignments in South America, and
they had put some teams together to send When the
projects came in, they didn't have anybody to
send. Everybody backed out. They didn't want to go
for some reason or another. Yeah, so then I had the
opportunity of my life. The vice president said
they needed to send someone to take care of some
very substantial projects in Chile. There was a
program, actually, by the Chilean government to
start planning in the country, establish
planning in the country. They were doing national
planning, regional planning, and local
planning. And our job was to develop the local
planning end of it. And in order to do national
planning, they felt they needed to have more
information at the local level in order to bring
together all the plans and therefore use those to
put together the national budgets for different
categories of investments. I think that I had left
and had taken a leave of absence from the firm
before you left for Chile. and had gone with the
Association of Bay Area Governments. That's
right. You were in transition to go to Association
of Bay Area Governments. That was all because of my
thesis. Oh, really? Which was on regional
planning in the Bay Area. I see. Well, that was
certainly the place to go at the time. Yeah, it was a
good move. Yeah, it was an impressive operation at
AIPAC, and I had a little knowledge of it, of
course, because we had to do some relating our own
local planning in the area, and we were very
conscious of what they were trying to do.
coordinate the whole Bay region was an impressive
project. And to this day, it seems to be an
impressive effort. We had pretty good support
from the federal government. Oh, yes. It was a big
effort. I think certainly that also led to the
creation of the Association of Bay Area
Governments, of course, which brought unity
between county cities and the state. A lot of
large-scale projects had to be coordinated at
that level. It couldn't be done otherwise without
that agency. I think it created an awareness of the
area as a region, which resulted in the Bay
Conservation and Development Commission. I was
going to say, that then was a follow-up with the
Conservation Commission. And the California
Coastal Zone Commission. Right. And that was also
forerunners of many of the coastal zone
management and large area management, regional
management programs we have since come to know.
Well, back to Chile. You were down there, and how
long were you in Chile? Well, I was there for two and
a half years. Two and a half years. And you finished
your work, and then you came back to Wolseyham and
Blair? After I finished the work there, they
wanted me to come back to the... San Francisco
office, San Mateo office. But at the time, I had
been in correspondence with Professor McGraw,
who had expressed an interest in my coming back. He
had left Wilson, Hammond, Blair, I believe, about
a year before I left to go to Chile, approximately.
And he had been offered a job over here at Texas A&M
University to head the planning program because
they had, actually, when he was here in
architecture, they had proposed a planning
program, and it was not approved. But it had
finally gotten approved around the middle 60s.
And so he was asked if he would come and have that
program. So he had done that in, I believe it was in
65 when he came to establish it. And so I had been in
Chile for two and a half years, so that would be 68.
So I think by then, Joe had been working on the
program for two or three years, something to that
effect. And so he needed faculty and had asked me if
I would join the faculty. I think that Jim Gardner
was already here. I think Jim, yes, had left the
California firm and had come over to the
department. Yes, by then he was here too, that's
right. So you were the third faculty member in the
planning department. I believe so, because when
did you come here? I came after you were here. Okay,
so that would be right then. Yeah, I came in the fall
of 1969. Okay, that's right. I came here in the fall
of 68, so about a year apart. It was a young program.
It was a new program. It had been established and
had gone through the first three years that were
required by, at the time, APA for recognition and
had met those requirements and had the kind of
recognition that was required at the time. So that
was the first program instead of Texas, actually.
A recognized program instead of Texas. So it was an
exciting experience to come back to the
University. I never thought I would come back to
A&M. And I was, you know, first teaching here, a
student, but it was a good experience to come back.
We had an exciting program. Okay, well then, what
were your ideas at that time, or did you remember
what your ideas were on planning education? Did
you, had you any philosophy that had developed
through your practice? Yeah, well, the practice
had been certainly valuable to alert me to the the
realities of the world out there. In Chile, I
really learned a lot about planning trial by fire,
so to speak, because I was alone 7,000 miles away
from my home office. And although we had really
top-notch people looking over my shoulder, like
Francis from Berkeley, who was a special
consultant. He was down there. Well, he was at
Berkeley, but he went down there once during the
process, or twice. But he had been in Latin America
for many years before that, so he knew the country
well and a lot of the people there. And he was a
recognized international consultant in Latin
America, and actually elsewhere, too, in Europe.
And so he was a good guide. And then we had other
people from the firm. Still, such great business
communications weren't that great. You
oftentimes had to act without complete guidance
always having the answers there from your
superiors and so forth. So I had to really look up a
lot of the stuff I had studied in school and reread
it and reconsider it in the light of the actual
practice. They've had so much political turmoil
in Chile. How did that affect your work? Well, it
was at times rough because we were outsiders at the
time. This was at the height of the Vietnam War, and
anti-Americanism was running pretty high in some
of these countries. The Communist Party and some
of the other socialist parties were pretty
powerful there in that part of the world. Oh,
excuse me. I'm sorry. Yeah, these groups were very
outspoken. And, of course, the Frey
administration at the time was trying to open up
democracy in the country and really provide a
democratic environment. So it did permit a lot of
outspokenness on the part of opposition parties.
There was a dialogue always going on in the
newspapers, in the media, news media, and so
forth. It was a very interesting experience
because Chile was a tug-of-war with Cuba because
Castro's Cuba had become a challenge to the United
States, hegemony in the area. They were using
Chile as a way of saying there was another way to go
about democratizing these countries. You don't
have to always use force. that there can be a
positive approach through democratic
procedures. And so President Frey was trying to
slowly Chileanize a lot of the things that were
actually, a lot of the big companies and the big
corporations that were owned by outside
interests, American and European interests. the
big mining copper mines and so forth, which really
were the backbone of the country's economy, were
really owned by outsiders. They had really no say
in the matter, very little say in the matter, in
fact. I understand a lot of British interests were
there. Yes, they were very strong. The British
interest was also very strong in the mining and the
phosphate mines and the copper mines as well. And
when the price of copper folded, they just left.
Yes, it just packed up and left everything.
Exactly. And the country, you see, depended on
income from copper. That was their main
moneymaker for the country. So during the war, of
course, this was a big income generator. And so it
heightened the need by Chileans, who were very
much nationalists, of course. And there's
nationalists that we can get about our own
country. They wanted their country to have some
control over their key resources on which the
country depended to be able to set some policy for
national development. Exactly, instead of
having to just pack up and leave you whenever they
want to, you know, have something that was a little
more consistent. And also to have a little more say
about the procedures for mining and how the
resources would be utilized. Well, it's
insulting not to. Oh, yes. And I could see, and that
was a very important learning experience for me, I
could see why there was so much anti-Americanism
developing in this region of the world, because
they could see the ugly American coming in there
and taking over a lot of these investments. And
while it's important, I don't want to minimize the
effort on the part of the American investor. I
think it's an important thing. It's a risky
venture, and it takes a lot of gumption to do it,
too. And that's good, and I think that should be
encouraged. I also think that a lot of times they
were able to corrupt local officials who would
manipulate their position and their position,
the arrangement, in such a manner that the country
was being, as a whole, left out of the picture. And
this is what, while it may have sounded like an
innocent thing at the time it was occurring, this
occurred, of course, way back in the turn of the
century, and even before the end of the century,
when us states were really important to the
country. This engendered, this animosity began
to build up, and it really surfaced in the 60s. And
the Vietnam War really brought all this out to the
surface. And we had tremendous, of course,
tug-of-war going on around the world at the time.
So it was an interesting experience for me because
I saw my country from a distance, and I appreciated
the United States even more from a distance,
because I think it's the greatest country in the
world to this day, even with all its mistakes and
flaws. But I also saw how we could do a lot more and be
a lot better partners, so to speak, in
development. So the planning we were doing, we
were motivated, of course, to do good planning so
that these communities could be planned for
appropriately and the resources be used
carefully so they could have a better environment
for their housing areas and their commercial
areas and their various needs for public
services. And that was a challenge we were opposed
with. And the planning was very much part of the
political arm of the Frey administration because
all this was being done, of course, to show that
they could work efficiently and produce a good
environment for the population. and complement
whatever the social services they were trying to
develop through good planning. So it had that
dimension to it. So we were obviously thrust into a
political environment automatically.
Everything we did had political implications. I
had some interesting experience in the southern
part of the country, because there was some
enclaves over there of communists and
socialists. There were very strong
anti-American feelings. I had an interesting
experience because being of Latin extraction,
Mexican-American, Mexican extraction, a lot of
times these people didn't know who I was. They
thought I was Chilean, they thought I was
Peruvian, they thought I was Central American.
Could they tell by your accent? No. Apparently, I
picked up their own language so quickly. Within
about three or four or six months, I was talking
like they were. I used their terms, all their
colloquialisms. At times, they thought I was
Chilean. Chile's a heterogeneous country. It's
very cosmopolitan in the first place. Like
Argentina. Very much so, yeah. Very, very
well-educated people. Good-sized middle class.
The best professionals you can find are in Chile
and Argentina, yeah. I think the climate has a lot
to do with that. They're in a temperate zone. Yes,
they are. And I guess they had a good stock of
migrations from Spain and Europe, Germany, and so
forth. They did have a pretty strong cadre of
professional middle-class groups. And the
countries are very strong for that reason. They
have tremendous capability.
So I had the opportunity to prepare two general
development plans, one for the city of Puerto
Montt, which is the extreme south part of the
country. It's a very interesting environment.
Better spell it. Better spell it. Yes, Porto
Montt, yeah, P-U-E-R-T-O, and then another word,
M-O-N-T-T, which I believe is a German word. It's a
German name of a family name in Chile. This port is
the last major port on the mainland of Chile before
you start the fjords that go all the way down to the
southern tip of the continent. The continent
fragments itself with a bunch of islands and so
forth, fjords. Down to Tierra del Fuego, where the
Fuegans live. Right. Down to Antarctica, which
they claim a little slice of. And so Puerto Montt
was the main port and the first port that a ship
would make at the rounding Cape Horn. Tierra del
Fuego, yes. And so it was always a thriving port,
major regional capital. It still remains a major
regional capital, but it lost some of its economic
strength when the Panama Canal was built and the
shipping then didn't have to go always around the
Cape. However, it used to be an important port, so
we did the planning. And they also suffered from
earthquakes. And this has been a tremendous
problem for them. So when we were there, I was doing
the planning. We started the work in 66, somewhere
in there. They had suffered some earthquakes
before in 50 and in, I believe, 62, somewhere in
there. And they were rebuilding the port and other
facilities. And so I found a lot of geologic
information that was put together by the U.S.
Geologic Survey and other international groups.
And I found that in California, interestingly
enough, before I left to go to Chile. And I had this
information with me, and we used it in the
planning. We looked at the soils, and we looked at
the location of faults, fault lines, and used this
information to locate the new residential areas
and the new public facilities and so forth, trying
to avoid the dangerous soils and so forth. And so it
was a beginning of integration of the spatial,
physical aspects with these danger areas as
identified by the geologists. And what was the
other city? The other city following was the city
of Osorno. Osorno, O-S-O-R-N-O,
is the capital also of a province of Yankeewe. And
it's an interesting city because it concentrates
a large number of German population. that came
over in the late 1800s, settlers to help settle
that part of the country. Did they speak Spanish?
Yes, a lot of them did, in fact, speak Spanish. It
was kind of curious to see a tall, six foot three or
four, blond, with blue eyes, speaking Chilean,
and with a German name. And a lot of prominent
German names in the rural countryside. I think
they speak mostly German. A lot of the old families
still just speak German. And so it's an
interesting project because it's the most
dynamic province in the country. It has the
strongest economy. It has a diversified economic
base. It has agriculture and it has a milk
processing product type industry. It has leather
goods products industries and so forth. They've
used this to diversify their economy base. In
Osorno, they also produce the best beef in the
country and have exported throughout the
country. And when I was in Chile, because of the
meat shortages, we had to ration beef. You could
only buy it one time a week on Friday, usually
Friday afternoons. And in Santiago, for example,
the capital city, you could only eat meat once a
week. But in Osorno, they ate meat every day
because they produced it and they weren't about to
ration themselves. As a Catholic country, I would
think they would have sold fish on Friday. Yes,
yes, right. That's true. No, I think the people
did, too, do that, yes. But because of the
rationing, then Friday became a very important
day for acquiring meat, even though it was a
Catholic country. They also promoted whale meat,
interestingly enough, because of this. Again, it
was a problem of cash flows. So anyway, we did the
work, and we completed the studies. So Sorna was a
very interesting experience because the mayor
was very dynamic. Not German expression, he was a
Spanish type, but very well-liked, very dynamic
guy. He had a broad support, political support.
He's probably the most dynamic politician I've
gone into, you know. He managed to bring diverse
groups together, and it made the planning very
interesting for that same reason, because we did
have a good, clear guide on what was critical and
what they felt was priority. So the planning was,
he gave us an office, and they had a 12-story office
building. That was their municipal building that
they financed, and they rented the lower floors
for offices to get income to pay for the building.
They had office spaces, and they gave us office
space. They gave us personnel to do all our work,
you know, So it was a very well-run thing. Of
course, it was a great advantage for you being able
to speak Spanish. Yes, that was very helpful,
definitely. And I think if they had sent a
consultant they had initially intended to, which
would not be people that were well versed in the
language, they would have a very hard time
completing the assignments. I would think so.
Because of the political pressure, we only had
literally 321 days to finish the assignments.
That was seven months. That was calendar days, not
working days. A job that I estimated would take 18
months to finish in California with all the
funding and resources available, we had to do in
seven months in Chile. So it was very intense, very
intense. And so I was blessed with good
colleagues. We had good local professionals that
helped and formed part of the team. So I was the only
one, well, two of us from the firm. Sounds like you
had good political leadership. Yeah. Yeah, very
much so. And so we did well, and the ministry
appreciated our work because we did a good piece of
work. It was an interesting experience because,
see, when we came, we were the only outside firm.
All the rest were Chilean firms. There were no,
except for one Chilean firm that had some
planning, could claim planning experience.
Everybody else were just basically
architectural firms. So part of the task was not
only to do the job, but to teach and to transmit the
idea of planning to the local people and to the
local professionals. And so we were always, when
we first, of course, showed up on the scene, we
said, oh, here comes this guy from the U.S., from
California, and they're going to want to propose,
you know, the moon, everything's going to cost,
you know, this harebrained solutions to the
problem. But interestingly enough, as our stay
there continued and we developed the project, Our
projects were the most reasonable and the most
realistic in terms of the local economy and the
availability of funds and the feasibility of
getting them done. And, in fact, one day we were
called in by the ministry to They wanted to find out
why, except that there were no complaints coming
out of Osorno about us, when they were getting
complaints out of everybody else from around the
country. And they wanted to know why. And so I
explained that we worked very closely with the
mayor, very closely with the council, the
governor, and the local community officials. And
you probably realized what the state of the
technology was. Yes, and that was the California
experience. We learned that in California,
because the citizen participation was
important, getting people involved early in the
process and keeping them informed. So we took that
over there, and it worked, and we gave reasonable
solutions to complicated problems that we felt
they could afford within their budgets. While the
other guys were producing some very, I mean, L.A.
was... Okay, of course, coming back from Chile,
although the firm had wanted me to go back to
California, they wanted me to continue with the
firm, I had been offered a job at Texas A&M
University, Professor McGraw, and Edward, at the
time, was... Edward Romanek. Well, Professor
McGraw was the director of the planning program
here. And Professor Edward Romnick was the dean,
yes, at the time. R-O-M-I-E-N-I-E-C. Right.
R-O-M-I-E-N-I-E-C.
And Edward Romnick was the dean, and Joe McGraw was
the department program chairman. So they invited
me if I would join the faculty. They wanted to
expand the faculty. I think they had also an
interest in the Latin American region. What year
was that? That was in 68. I came back in the middle of
68. So I started in the fall of 68. Were you married
then? No, I was single. I got married the following
year in 1969. In fact, on my way through here to say
hello to my friends and introduce my new bride, we
ran into the situation of a contract had been sent,
or another contract, but a proposal, rather, a
request for proposal had been sent to the
university, to Jim Gardner, who then had joined
the planning faculty, Professor Gardner. From
Wilsey, Hammond, Blair. Who had been also at
Wilsey, Hammond, Blair before in California. And
Mr. Stan Ott. With McGraw and Cornish and
Hinojosa. Yeah, right. I always call it the
finishing school of planners. We all had gone
through it and had gotten good experience out of
it. And then Stanley Ott, who we knew, both of us
knew, you and I knew at San Mateo, who had been
planning director there, had got an assignment
with USAID, the United States Agency for
International Development, in Colombia. And so
he sent this request proposal to Jim Gardner, whom
he knew, and inquiring if we would be interested in
responding to it by providing technical
assistance in planning to the city of Cali, the
second largest city in the country of Colombia.
And so Jim Garner passed the document to me asking
if I would be interested because it would require
someone with the language capability and the
interest in the Latin American region and so
forth. And so myself and Tom Stallworth, Thomas
Stallworth who was a local professional who had
just finished the planning program and was a civil
engineer but a very, very interesting person, and
had an interest in the Latin American region, the
two of us got together and responded to the
request. So we sent back, we prepared the request,
the response to the request for the proposal, and I
took it with me, and on the road, on my honeymoon, I
mailed it, I think, out of California after I
finished all the questions they wanted answers
to, and mailed it, signed it, and mailed it. And
then when we get back about three weeks later,
there was a cable that came in, saying that they
wanted us to go, both Tom and I, to go and form part of
this team that they were forming. There was
another gentleman from the University of
Wisconsin and another one from Berkeley. Do you
know who they were? Aaron Horowitz from Berkeley
was a housing specialist, old gentleman, very,
very capable. And Ved Prakash was from the
University of Wisconsin, and he did the financial
analysis. Ved, V-E-D is his first name, and last
name is P-R-A-K-A-S-H, very capable fellow UN
expert type and so forth. And then Aaron Horowitz
is from Berkeley, also very respected in the
field, H-O-R-O-W-I-T-Z.
Okay, so we spent actually the latter half of 69, I
believe the first month of 70 in Colombia working
with the Cali General Development Plan. and
reorganize the whole work for them. And that's why
you and I did not meet when I first got here. Yes. I
arrived in October, one month after the fall
semester had begun. I see, yes. And I had been
invited by Dean Romanek at that time, I think at the
request of Joe McGraw. And what had happened was
they were short in architecture. And so I was
invited to guest speak, and that worked out well.
So then I got an invitation to join the faculty the
first year in architecture, teaching fifth-year
design. And then they would make room on the
planning faculty for me the following year. So we
didn't meet, because you were away in Cali. Yes, in
Colombia, South America. Very true. And so then we
came back in the spring then of 1970, which you had
been here a semester then, and got back into the
program. And of course, as I was telling you
earlier, the turmoil that was going on in the world
at the time because of the Vietnam War, it spilled
over into our own environment here in our own
campuses. And we were in a stage of reconsidering a
lot of our policies and priorities and Jack
Kennedy had, of course, established the Peace
Corps program, which had generated a lot of
interest abroad. And our kids were coming back
with a lot of ideas about what they wanted to do with
this world. And the environmental issue was
beginning to heat up, too, the environmental
crisis. The Vista volunteers were beginning to
impact the communities where they were. In other
parts of the country, they were having urban
riots. Urban riots, right. I forget when the Watts
riot was. But I mean, there was just, yeah,
everywhere you could think of, Chicago, the
Northeast, and so forth, they were having riots. A
lot of turmoil, a lot of unrest. And that was also
affecting the planning programs. And it seemed
like the planning program, because I guess we were
a maverick anyway on the campus to begin with. We
kind of broke out of the mold, the more traditional
mold here at the university. We were looked at with
some suspicion. And our students were different.
They did. I think that that was nationwide. Yeah,
true. Most of the action on campuses, like at Kent
State and Berkeley, really were instituted by
architecture and planning students. Very much
so. And there were young kids that were concerned
with social problems, and the deterioration of
our urban environments in the post-war era had not
been accomplished. And they wanted to do things.
They wanted to change this world. And I guess
Kennedy also, John Kennedy, was inspirational in
giving some of the spiritual guidance to this. And
then the environmental movement took off, and
that certainly became a very powerful moving
force. And so all of that impacted the program, and
our students were active, not perhaps certainly
as active and demonstrative as the Berkeley
students or elsewhere, but they still were
raising questions and creating enough interest,
you know, that sometimes they worried the
administration and so forth. Yeah, of course,
that was during the era of President Johnson's
administration. Yes. In an era of fantastic
social legislation. That's right. With the Model
Cities program and Office of Economic
Opportunities and so forth. Right. Because John
Kennedy, of course, was a senator in 63, wasn't he?
But his programs continued to... Were picked up by
Johnson. Right. And Johnson continued. That's
right. President Lyndon Johnson, whom, by the
way, we met on our honeymoon on the way out to the
West Coast by accident there at the... At the
ranch? At the ranch, yeah. He was driving in with
about 10 state governors from around the country
that he was having a meeting with there at the
Pedernales Ranch. And so we said hello to him and
had a little chat with him. He was an interesting
fellow. And anyway, of course, we're in the
planning program. We're trying to respond to this
concern by young people with the environment of
the country, the planning conditions of the
country. And planning was supposed to take a
leadership role in influencing policymaking. So
I had, of course, an interest in helping with that.
And a very good background to do it. Yeah, well, the
experience, of course, had been good, yeah, in
California and Chile. And of course, at Harvard,
we had also been imbued with similar concerns. I
mean, the same kind of concerns had begun to
surface when I was at Harvard, but it hadn't taken
off yet. It was just beginning to start. And the
activism was beginning to take off. We had some of
that. And of course, I was concerned with trying to
establish a professional program that was
well-respected and well-recognized and that
wasn't frivolous. Because a lot of it was
frivolity, in fact. And of course, we were also
impacted by some of the writings of Davidoff and
Reiner, Tom Reiner and Paul Davidoff were talking
about what was it, the choice theory of planning.
Choice theory. Yeah, and so forth. And advocacy
and all. The idea of advocacy, of groups doing
their own plans. Well, to me, it was interesting,
but at the same time, to me, it created a dilemma, a
problem, because if we have a community plan, how
can we have a bunch of isolated plans being
developed by individualized community groups
with their own ideas, what they thought the plan
should be, if the whole thing couldn't be brought
together? And that was, in fact, the Achilles
heel, so to speak, of the idea. of that particular
concept, you know. Well, I think at the extreme it
led to anarchy in planning. Yes, exactly. There
was no real official plan that anyone could look
to. That's all you could look for was anarchy,
exactly. It was total chaos and no focus of any
kind. So I had, my concern was trying to
incorporate the concept of citizen
participation, maximum citizen involvement,
certainly work, but working through the elected
leadership, because I felt that they were the
official representatives of the community that
were elected to office, you know. And so I tried to
strike a balance between citizens' involvement
and be able to, through surveys and talking to
people, having neighborhood community surveys,
be able to, in fact, elicit what their concerns
were and then introduce those into the community
plan and have the leadership accept them because
they were well-reasoned and well-developed. So
it was a very interesting period for me to come back
from Chile and get into this local environment
here. Of course, we were a small department. We
were a growing department at the time. I believe we
must have had about 30 or 35 students, graduate
students. We were just a graduate program. With
one degree? One degree, the master's in urban
planning. And we had about how many faculty, Bob?
Let's see, Joe, Jim, yourself, and myself. Was it
Claude Davis? I don't remember. I think Claude was
teaching in political science, but he taught some
of our undergraduate introductory courses.
That's right. And these were courses that were set
up to help introduce the environmental design
students in the undergraduate programs to
planning who might have an interest in the
planning field. Which never did work. Well, up to a
point in the day, we were able to attract some
students, but never really fully integrated,
because the whole concept of the environmental
design program was not understood really by the
department heads at the time that were running it.
Or by the faculty in the other department. Or the
faculty, yeah, because I saw it as a tremendous
opportunity for a young student to come into the
college and enter as a freshman and maybe explore
architecture or landscape architecture or
planning or building construction. or just
general environmental design concerns, and then
find his or her way eventually into some career
focus. And that this was a much more healthy
environment than when I was a freshman because
when I was a freshman, it was either architecture
or building construction. You had no other
choice. And if you went too far into any one of those
degrees, you would begin to lose credit values
because other careers would require other
backgrounds. I felt that this was, and I still
think it is a good curriculum to develop properly.
And so our undergraduate courses, we had three or
four undergraduate courses, were designed to
just explore and expose the students to the field
of planning to see if in their graduate work they
might pursue it. And certainly, just as citizens,
they could make good use of it. Oh, yeah. In any
field that they would go into knowing something
about what is land use planning or what is zoning
and how does it work and so forth certainly would be
useful to anybody in civil engineering or
architecture or any other field. Or just in
voting. Just as a citizen, right, who can make some
enlightenment judgments or go to the planning
commission or before the planning commission and
say a few things about their neighborhood because
they know, at least they have a sense of the
relationships of their neighborhood to the rest
of the city. So yeah, that was true. That was
important. So Claude Davis helped us with some of
those courses. He taught partially in political
science and partially over here. Eventually, of
course, he was able to transfer over to the
planning department and became a full-time
member of our faculty. What courses were you
teaching? I taught laboratories, the planning
labs, 601 and 602, usually, were the ones that I
taught. They were urban planning laboratories. I
taught the comprehensive planning course on
location. There wasn't a comprehensive planning
course then. There wasn't? No. We had 365, but we
didn't have comprehensive planning. I
introduced the comprehensive planning course.
Well, I thought it was already established.
Anyway, when I taught it, I thought I prepared a-
365 you might have taught. Possibly. I think
that's probably what it was. We had 665, which
became, in fact, the whole place graduate level
course. All I know is that I taught it afterwards. I
would teach sometimes a housing course. I would
ask them to teach the housing course. And I also
taught, well, I was asked to create two courses.
One was planning in the developing countries. And
one was planning 621, which was geared to Latin
America. And then planning 620, which was geared
to Latin America plus other parts of the
developing world, Africa and Far East. And those
courses were taught again. They were elective
courses that were available to planning students
and anybody on campus. And those became
interesting courses because a lot of students
took them from around the campus. And I always had
these mixed classes of students in agriculture or
engineering or planning.